quanto: a pytorch quantization toolkit (#1832)
huggingface/blog: quanto-introduction.md

Many open-source libraries are available to quantize pytorch Deep Learning Models, each providing very powerful features, yet often restricted to specific model configurations and devices.

Also, although being based on the same design principles, they are unfortunately most of the time incompatible with one another.

Today, we are excited to introduce [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto), a versatile pytorch quantization toolkit, that provides several unique features:

- available in eager mode (works with non-traceable models),
- quantized models can be placed on any device (including CUDA and MPS),
- automatically inserts quantization and dequantization stubs,
- automatically inserts quantized functional operations,
- automatically inserts quantized modules (see below the list of supported modules),
- provides a seamless workflow from a float model to a dynamic to a static quantized model,
- supports quantized model serialization as a `state_dict`,
- supports not only `int8` weights, but also `int2` and `int4`,
- supports not only `int8` activations, but also `float8`.

> The goal of [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) is not to replace other quantization libraries, but to foster innovation by lowering the bar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recent quantization methods appear to be focussed on quantizing Large Language Models (LLMs), whereas quanto intends to provide extremely simple quantization primitives for using simple quantization schemes (linear quantization, per-group quantization) that are adaptable across any modality.

The goal of [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) is not to replace other quantization libraries, but to foster innovation by lowering the bar
```

**2. Calibrate (optional if activations are not quantized)**

Quanto supports a calibration mode that allows to record the activation ranges while passing representative samples through the quantized model.

```python
with calibration(momentum=0.9):
    model(samples)
```

This automatically activates the quantization of the activations in the quantized modules.

**3. Tune, aka Quantization-Aware-Training (optional)**

If the performance of the model degrades too much, one can tune it for a few epochs to try to recover the float model performance.

```python
model.train()
for batch_idx, (data, target) in enumerate(train_loader):
    data, target = data.to(device), target.to(device)
    optimizer.zero_grad()
    output = model(data).dequantize()
    loss = torch.nn.functional.nll_loss(output, target)
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
```

**4. Freeze integer weights**

When freezing a model, its float weights are replaced by quantized integer weights.

```python
freeze(model)
```

Please refer to the [examples](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/tree/main/examples) for instantiations of that workflow.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add link to notebook to test quanto library. I kept it very simple. Feel free to modify the notebook if you want ! 
```suggestion
You can also check this [notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1qB6yXt650WXBWqroyQIegB-yrWKkiwhl?usp=sharing) where we show you how to quantize bloom model with quanto !
```

## Performances

TO BE COMPLETED

## Integration in 🤗 transformers

> TO BE COMPLETED

Author: Integrated.

## Contributing to 🤗 quanto

> Contributions to [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) are very much welcomed, and there

Author: Done

---
title: "Quanto: a pytorch quantization toolkit"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/169_quanto_intro/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: dacorvo
- user: ybelkada
- user: marcsun13
---

# Quanto: a pytorch quantization toolkit

Quantization is a technique to reduce the computational and memory costs of evaluating Deep Learning Models by representing their weights and activations with low-precision data types like 8-bit integer (int8) instead of the usual 32-bit floating point (float32).

Reducing the number of bits means the resulting model requires less memory storage, which is crucial for deploying Large Language Models on consumer devices.

> It also allows to take advantage of specific optimizations for lower bitwidth datatypes, such as `int8` of `float8` matrix multiplications on CUDA devices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It also enables specific optimizations for lower bitwidth datatypes, such as `int8` or `float8` matrix multiplications on CUDA devices.
```

Many open-source libraries are available to quantize pytorch Deep Learning Models, each providing very powerful features, yet often restricted to specific model configurations and devices.

> Also, although being based on the same design principles, they are unfortunately most of the time incompatible with one another.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Also, although they are based on the same design principles, they are unfortunately often incompatible with one another.
```

Today, we are excited to introduce [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto), a versatile pytorch quantization toolkit, that provides several unique features:

> - available in eager mode (works with non-traceable models),

Reviewer 3: Small nit, but for lists you don't have to add any punctuation at the end since its not considered continuous :)

```suggestion
- available in eager mode (works with non-traceable models)
```

- quantized models can be placed on any device (including CUDA and MPS),
- automatically inserts quantization and dequantization stubs,
- automatically inserts quantized functional operations,
- automatically inserts quantized modules (see below the list of supported modules),

> - provides a seamless workflow from a float model to a dynamic to a static quantized model,

Reviewer 3: I think this might be a little clearer

```suggestion
- provides a seamless workflow for a float model, going from a dynamic to a static quantized model,
```

- supports quantized model serialization as a `state_dict`,
- supports not only `int8` weights, but also `int2` and `int4`,
- supports not only `int8` activations, but also `float8`.

> Recent quantization methods appear to be focussed on quantizing Large Language Models (LLMs), whereas [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) intends to provide extremely simple quantization primitives for using simple quantization schemes (linear quantization, per-group quantization) that are adaptable across any modality.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Recent quantization methods appear to be focused on quantizing Large Language Models (LLMs), whereas [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) intends to provide extremely simple quantization primitives for simple quantization schemes (linear quantization, per-group quantization) that are adaptable across any modality.
```

The goal of [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) is not to replace other quantization libraries, but to foster innovation by lowering the bar
to implement and combine quantization features.

Make no mistake, quantization is hard, and integrating it seamlessly in existing models requires a deep understanding of pytorch internals.

> But don't worry: [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto)'s goal is to do most of the heavy-lifting for you, so that you can focus
> on what matters most: exploring the realms of low-bitwidth machine learning and finding solutions for the GPU poor.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But don't worry, [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto)'s goal is to do most of the heavy-lifting for you, so that you can focus
on what matters most, exploring low-bitwidth machine learning and finding solutions for the GPU poor.
```

## Quantization workflow

Quanto is available as a pip package.

```sh
pip install quanto
```

> [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) does not make a clear distinction between dynamic and static quantization: models are first dynamically quantized,
> but their weights can later be "frozen" to static values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) does not make a clear distinction between dynamic and static quantization. Models are dynamically quantized first,
but their weights can be "frozen" later to static values.
```

A typical quantization workflow consists of the following steps:

**1. Quantize**

The first step converts a standard float model into a dynamically quantized model.

```python
quantize(model, weights=quanto.qint8, activations=quanto.qint8)
```

> At this stage, only the inference of the model is modified to dynamically quantize the float weights.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At this stage, the model's float weights are dynamically quantized only for inference.
```

**2. Calibrate (optional if activations are not quantized)**

> Quanto supports a calibration mode that allows to record the activation ranges while passing representative samples through the quantized model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Quanto supports a calibration mode that records the activation ranges while passing representative samples through the quantized model.
```

```python
with calibration(momentum=0.9):
    model(samples)
```

This automatically activates the quantization of the activations in the quantized modules.

**3. Tune, aka Quantization-Aware-Training (optional)**

If the performance of the model degrades too much, one can tune it for a few epochs to try to recover the float model performance.

```python
model.train()
for batch_idx, (data, target) in enumerate(train_loader):
    data, target = data.to(device), target.to(device)
    optimizer.zero_grad()
    output = model(data).dequantize()
    loss = torch.nn.functional.nll_loss(output, target)
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
```

**4. Freeze integer weights**

When freezing a model, its float weights are replaced by quantized integer weights.

```python
freeze(model)
```

> Please refer to the [examples](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/tree/main/examples) for instantiations of that workflow.
> You can also check this [notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1qB6yXt650WXBWqroyQIegB-yrWKkiwhl?usp=sharing) where we show you how to quantize bloom model with quanto !

Reviewer 3: It'd be clearer to specify what "that workflow" refers to. I assume you mean the entire quantization workflow, but since it comes right after the "freeze integer weights" step it is a bit ambiguous and could also refer to that.

```suggestion
Please refer to the [examples](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/tree/main/examples) for instantiations of the quantization workflow.
You can also check this [notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1qB6yXt650WXBWqroyQIegB-yrWKkiwhl?usp=sharing) where we show you how to quantize a BLOOM model with quanto!
```

> ## Performances

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Performance
```

> These are some very preliminary results, as we are constantly improving both the accuracy and efficiency of quantized models, but it looks already very promising.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These are some very preliminary results, as we are constantly improving both the accuracy and efficiency of quantized models, but it already looks very promising.
```

Below are two graphs evaluating the accuracy of different quantized configurations for [mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1).

Note: the first bar in each group always corresponds to the non-quantized model.

<div class="row"><center>
  <div class="column">
    <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/blob/main/bench/generation/charts/mistralai-Mistral-7B-v0.1_Accuracy.png" alt="mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1 Lambada prediction accuracy">
  </div>
 </center>
</div>

<div class="row"><center>
  <div class="column">
    <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/blob/main/bench/generation/charts/mistralai-Mistral-7B-v0.1_Perplexity.png" alt="mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1 Lambada prediction accuracy">
  </div>
 </center>
</div>

> These results are obtained without applying any Post-Training-Optimization algorithm like [hqq](https://mobiusml.github.io/hqq_blog/) or [AWQ](https://github.com/mit-han-lab/llm-awq), and they are already very promising.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These results are obtained without applying any Post-Training-Optimization algorithm like [hqq](https://mobiusml.github.io/hqq_blog/) or [AWQ](https://github.com/mit-han-lab/llm-awq).
```

> Stay tuned for updates as we will start including some optimizers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

The graph below gives the latency per-token measured on an NVIDIA A100 GPU.

<div class="row"><center>
  <div class="column">
    <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/blob/main/bench/generation/charts/mistralai-Mistral-7B-v0.1_Latency__ms_.png" alt="mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1 Mean Latency per token">
  </div>
 </center>
</div>

> These are some very preliminary results, without any optimized matrix multiplication kernels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These results don't include any optimized matrix multiplication kernels.
```

You can see that the quantization adds a significant overhead for lower bitwidth.

> Stay however tuned for updated results as we are constantly improving [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) and will add soon optimized kernels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Stay tuned for updated results as we are constantly improving [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) and will soon add optimizers and optimized kernels.
```

> Please refer to the [quanto benchs](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/tree/main/bench/) for detailed results for different model architectures and configurations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please refer to the [quanto benchmarks](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/tree/main/bench/) for detailed results for different model architectures and configurations.
```

## Integration in 🤗 transformers

> Quanto library is seamlessly integrated in Hugging Face [🤗 transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers) library. You can quantize any model by passing a `QuantoConfig` to `from_pretrained`!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Quanto is seamlessly integrated in the Hugging Face [🤗 transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers) library. You can quantize any model by passing a `QuantoConfig` to `from_pretrained`!
```

> Currently you need to use the latest version of [🤗 accelerate](https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate) to make sure that the integration is fully compatible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, you need to use the latest version of [🤗 accelerate](https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate) to make sure the integration is fully compatible.
```

```python
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer, QuantoConfig

model_id = "facebook/opt-125m"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)

quantization_config = QuantoConfig(weights="int8")

quantized_model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    quantization_config= quantization_config
)
```

> You can quantize the weights and / or activations in int8, float8, int4 or int2 by simply passing the correct argument in `QuantoConfig`. The activations can be either in int8 or float8 - note for float8 you need to have hardware that is compatible with float8 precision, otherwise quanto will silently upcast the weights and activations to torch.float32 or torch.float16 (depending on the original data type of the model) when we perform the matmul (only when the weight is quantized). Note if you try to use `float8` using MPS devices, `torch` will currently raise an error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can quantize the weights and/or activations in int8, float8, int4, or int2 by simply passing the correct argument in `QuantoConfig`. The activations can be either in int8 or float8. For float8, you need to have hardware that is compatible with float8 precision, otherwise quanto will silently upcast the weights and activations to torch.float32 or torch.float16 (depending on the original data type of the model) when we perform the matmul (only when the weight is quantized). If you try to use `float8` using MPS devices, `torch` will currently raise an error.
```

> Quanto is device agnostic, meaning you can quantize your model regardless if you are on CPU / GPU / MPS (Apple Silicon) therefore you can run quantized models on any of these devices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Quanto is device agnostic, meaning you can quantize and run your model regardless if you are on CPU/GPU/ MPS (Apple Silicon).
```

> Quanto is also torch.compile friendly, you can quantize a model with quanto and call `torch.compile` to the model to compile it for faster generation. Note this feature might not work out of the box if dymanic quantization is involved (i.e. Quantization Aware Training or quantized activations enabled). Make sure to keep `activations=None` when creating your `QuantoConfig` in case you use the transformers integration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Quanto is also torch.compile friendly. You can quantize a model with quanto and call `torch.compile` to the model to compile it for faster generation. This feature might not work out of the box if dynamic quantization is involved (i.e., Quantization Aware Training or quantized activations enabled). Make sure to keep `activations=None` when creating your `QuantoConfig` in case you use the transformers integration.
```

> Note it is also possible to quantize any model, regardless of the modality using quanto ! We demonstrate how to quantize `openai/whisper-large-v3` model in int8 using quanto.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is also possible to quantize any model, regardless of the modality using quanto! We demonstrate how to quantize `openai/whisper-large-v3` model in int8 using quanto.
```

```python
from transformers import AutoModelForSpeechSeq2Seq

model_id = "openai/whisper-large-v3"
quanto_config = QuantoConfig(weights="int8")

model = AutoModelForSpeechSeq2Seq.from_pretrained(
   model_id,
   torch_dtype=torch.float16,
   device_map="cuda",
   quantization_config=quanto_config
)
```

> Check out this [notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/16CXfVmtdQvciSh9BopZUDYcmXCDpvgrT?usp=sharing#scrollTo=IHbdLXAg53JL) for a complete tutorial on how to properly use quanto with transformers integration !

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Check out this [notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/16CXfVmtdQvciSh9BopZUDYcmXCDpvgrT?usp=sharing#scrollTo=IHbdLXAg53JL) for a complete tutorial on how to properly use quanto with the transformers integration!
```

For floating-point destination types, the mapping is done by the native pytorch cast (i.e. `Tensor.to()`).

For integer destination types, the mapping is a simple rounding operation (i.e. `torch.round()`).

The goal of the projection is to increase the accuracy of the conversion by minimizing the number of:
- saturated values (i.e. mapped to the destination type min/max),
- zeroed values (because they are below the smallest number that can be represented by the destination type)

For efficiency, the projection is symmetric for `8-bit` quantization types, i.e. it is centered around zero.
Symmetric quantized Tensors are usually compatible with many standard operations.

For lower bitwidth quantization types, such as `int2` or `int4`, the projection is affine, i.e. it uses a `zeropoint` to shift the
projected values, which allows a better coverage of the quantization range. Affine quantized Tensors are typically harder to work with
and require custom operations.

### Quantized modules

Quanto provides a generic mechanism to replace torch modules (`torch.nn.Module`) by `quanto` modules that are able to process `quanto` tensors.

> Quanto modules dynamically convert their `weight` parameter until a model is frozen, which slows down inference a bit but is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Quanto modules dynamically convert their `weight` parameter until a model is frozen, which slows inference down a bit but is
```

required if the model needs to be tuned (a.k.a Quantization Aware Training).

Module `bias` parameters are not quantized because they are much smaller than `weights` and quantized addition is hard to accelerate.

Activations are dynamically quantized using static scales (defaults to the range `[-1, 1]`). The model needs to be calibrated to evaluate

> the best activation scales (using a momentum).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the best activation scales (using momentum).
```

The following modules can be quantized:

- [Linear](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.Linear.html) (QLinear).
Weights are always quantized, and biases are not quantized. Inputs and outputs can be quantized.
- [Conv2d](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.Conv2d.html) (QConv2D).
Weights are always quantized, and biases are not quantized. Inputs and outputs can be quantized.
- [LayerNorm](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.LayerNorm.html),
Weights and biases are __not__ quantized. Outputs can be quantized.

### Custom operations

> Thanks to the awesome pytorch dispach mechanism, [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) provides implementations for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thanks to the awesome pytorch dispatch mechanism, [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto) provides implementations for
```

> the most common functions used in [🤗 transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers) or [🤗 diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers) models, allowing to use quantized Tensors without modifying much the modeling code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the most common functions used in [🤗 transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers) or [🤗 diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers) models, enabling quantized Tensors without modifying the modeling code too much.
```

Most of these "dispatched" functions can be performed using combinations of standard pytorch operations.

Complex functions however require the definition of custom operations under the `torch.ops.quanto` namespace.

Examples of such operations are fused matrix multiplications involving lower bitwidth terms.

### Post-training quantization optimizers

> That feature is not available yet in [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto), but the library is versatile enough

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Post-training quantization optimizers are not available yet in [🤗 quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto), but the library is versatile enough
```

to be compatible with most PTQ optimization algorithms like [hqq](https://mobiusml.github.io/hqq_blog/) or [AWQ](https://github.com/mit-han-lab/llm-awq).

> The plan is to integrate the most popular algorithms in the most seamless possible way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Moving forward, the plan is to integrate the most popular algorithms in the most seamless possible way.
```

**2. Calibrate (optional if activations are not quantized)**

Quanto supports a calibration mode that allows to record the activation ranges while passing representative samples through the quantized model.

```python
with calibration(momentum=0.9):
    model(samples)
```

This automatically activates the quantization of the activations in the quantized modules.

**3. Tune, aka Quantization-Aware-Training (optional)**

If the performance of the model degrades too much, one can tune it for a few epochs to try to recover the float model performance.

```python
model.train()
for batch_idx, (data, target) in enumerate(train_loader):
    data, target = data.to(device), target.to(device)
    optimizer.zero_grad()
    output = model(data).dequantize()
    loss = torch.nn.functional.nll_loss(output, target)
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
```

**4. Freeze integer weights**

When freezing a model, its float weights are replaced by quantized integer weights.

```python
freeze(model)
```

Please refer to the [examples](https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/tree/main/examples) for instantiations of that workflow.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add link to notebook to test quanto library. I kept it very simple. Feel free to modify the notebook if you want !

```suggestion
You can also check this [notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1qB6yXt650WXBWqroyQIegB-yrWKkiwhl?usp=sharing) where we show you how to quantize bloom model with quanto !
```

## Performances

These are some very preliminary results, as we are constantly improving both the accuracy and efficiency of quantized models, but it looks already very promising.

Below are two graphs evaluating the accuracy of different quantized configurations for [mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1](https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1).

Note: the first bar in each group always corresponds to the non-quantized model.

<div class="row"><center>
  <div class="column">
    <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/blob/main/bench/generation/charts/mistralai-Mistral-7B-v0.1_Accuracy.png" alt="mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1 Lambada prediction accuracy">
  </div>
 </center>
</div>

<div class="row"><center>
  <div class="column">
    <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/quanto/blob/main/bench/generation/charts/mistralai-Mistral-7B-v0.1_Perplexity.png" alt="mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1 Lambada prediction accuracy">
  </div>
 </center>
</div>

These results are obtained without applying any Post-Training-Optimization algorithm, and they are already very promising.

> Stay tuned for updates as we will start including some optimizers.

Reviewer 2: Could you give some example of `Post-Training-Optimization algorithm` ? I think that the user might not understand !

Author: Done
